content: draft: Assess source systems (#1403)
slsa-framework/slsa: docs/spec/draft/verifying-source-systems.md

provides sample questions consumers can ask when assessing a SCS. See also
[Threats & mitigations](threats.md).

## Threats

### Adversary goal

The SLSA Source track defends against an adversary whose primary goal is to
inject unofficial behavior into protected source code while avoiding detection.
Organizations typically establish change management processes to prevent this
unofficial behavior from being introduced. The adversary's goal is to bypass the
change management process.

### Adversary profiles

Consumers SHOULD also evaluate the souce control systems's ability to defend
against the following types of adversaries.

1.  Project contributors, who can:
    -   Propose changes to the target's source repo.
    -   Fork the target source repo
    -   Modify a fork of the target's source repo and cause users of the target
        source repo to use the modified source.
2.  Project maintainer, who can:
    -   Do everything listed under "project contributors".
    -   Create or update branches within the target source repo.
    -   Create or update tags within the target source repo.
    -   Modify workflows used to enforce the change management process.

> 3.  Source control system administrators, who can:
>     -   Do everything listed under "project contributors" and "project
>         maintainers".
>     -   Modify target source repos while bypassing the project's controls.
>     -   Introduce unofficial behavior into the Source Control System's codebase.
>     -   Access the control plane's cryptographic secrets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3.  Source control system administrators, who can:
    -   Do everything listed under "project contributors" and "project
        maintainers".
    -   Modify the source repo while bypassing the project maintainer's controls.
    -   Modify the behavior of the Source Control System itself.
    -   Access the control plane's cryptographic secrets.
```

## Souce Control System components

Consumers SHOULD consider at least these elements when assessing a Source
Control System for SLSA conformance: control configuration, change management
interface, control plane & verifer, storage.

![source control system components](images/source-control-system-components.svg)

The following section details these elements and gives prompts for assessing a
Source Control System's ability to produced SLSA Source L4 revisions.

### Change management interface

The change management interface is the user interface for proposing and
approving changes within a source repository. During normal operation all
changes go through this interface.

#### Prompts for assessing the change management interface

-   How does the SCS manage which actors are permitted to approve changes?
-   What types of non-plain-text changes can the change management interface
    render? How well does the SCS render those changes?
-   What controls does the change management interface provide for enabling
    Trusted Robot Contributions? Example: SLSA Build L3+ provenance, built from
    SLSA Source L4+ source.

### Control configuration

> Control configuration is how project owners establish technical controls in a

Reviewer: we should decide, slsa-wide, whether to call these "project owners" or producers. 
I think of "producers" as being a much larger org than the team who might own a repo.

Author: +1, I'm not sure I have an opinion though.

I may turn this into an issue and defer. :)

Author: If nothing else, let me change it to 'organizations' to match the current source track terminology.

given source repository. If done well the configuration will reflect the intent
of the organization.

#### Prompts for assessing control configuration

-   How does the SCS prevent regression in control configurations?
    Examples: 'one way controls' that cannot be reverted, notifying maintainers
    when controls change, requiring public declaration of control changes.
-   How does the SCS prevent administrators from tampering with controls

>     configured by projects?

Reviewer: > Examples: 'one way controls' that cannot be reverted, notifying maintainers
    when controls change, requiring public declaration of control changes.

It seems like "maintainers" are a subset of the organization that is already defining the correct behavior of the SCS. 

I've not yet seen a clean definition of "one-way controls" that fits this use case. 

In a larger team, the "enterprise part" of the organization may build controls that are "one way" from the perspective of the "repo administrator part" of the organization, but those are definitely both just "the organization" from a consumer's perspective. 

To a consumer, "one-way" seems to just mean "after a certain revision, all revisions came with an SCS claim of X"

Author: Yeah the notifying part is as a mitigation in case one maintainer decides to make a change without the consent or knowledge of the other maintainers.

"You can change this yourself but we'll let all your friends know."

source provenance for each revision. The control plane is operated by one or
more administrators, who have privileges to modify the control plane.

The verifier is the SCS component that evaluates source provenance and generates
and signs a
[verification summary attestation](source-requirements#summary-attestation)
(VSA)that details the SLSA Source Level and other properties a given revision
has.

#### Prompts for assessing the control plane & verifier

-   Administration
    -   What are the ways an employee can use privileged access to influence a
        revision creation, provenance generation, or VSA generation? Examples:
        physical access, terminal access, access to cryptographic secrets
    -   What controls are in place to detect or prevent the employee from
        abusing such access? Examples: two-person approvals, audit logging,
        workload identities
    -   Roughly how many employees have such access?
    -   How are privileged accounts protected? Examples: two-factor
        authentication, client device security policies
    -   What plans do you have for recovering from security incidents and

>         platform outages? Are they tested? How frequently?

Reviewer: probably "employee" should be "contributor" here?
There's no requirement that they're getting paid 😂

Author: Hmm.  Is there a word we can use that makes it clear it's not a 'project contributor' but an 'SCS contributor'?

'administrator'?  Maybe just 'SCS contributor'?

Consumers SHOULD consider at least these elements when assessing a Source
Control System for SLSA conformance: control configuration, change management
interface, control plane, verifier, storage.

![source control system components](images/source-control-system-components.svg)

The following section details these elements.

### Change management interface

The change management interface is the user interface for proposing and
approving changes to protected branches within a source repository. During
normal operation all such changes go through this interface.

### Control configuration

Control configuration is how organizations establish technical controls in a
given source repository. If done well the configuration will reflect the intent
of the organization.

### Technical controls

Technical controls are the organization configured settings that are used to
determine if a revision can be introduced into storage within any particular
context and who has access to those revisions.

The technical controls component is responsible for the storage of these
settings while the [control plane](#control-plane) is responsible for enforcing
the configured controls.

They include:

> -   Read/write ACLs,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   Read/write ACLs
```

-   If approvals are required to introduce changes within a given context
-   Which actors are allowed to issue those approvals
-   Organization defined
    [change management processes](#enforced-change-management-process)
    requirements

> -   etc...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   etc.
```

I could also see removing the etc. since "include" above indicates it's not exhaustive.
